+++
title = "$100k"
description = "Is money of any use?"
date = 2022-06-16T20:34:53+05:30
author = "Rajat Arora"
categories = ["personal"]
tags = ["finance", "frugal"]
draft = false

+++

It took me over nine years, but today I can proudly say that I have $100k [^1] saved up in my account.

(Yeah, not literally in a _bank account_, but you get the gist).

With this money, I can buy a tiny house in New Delhi, among the most expensive cities in India in terms of real estate, without taking on a loan. _This is huge_.

When I received my first salary in 2013, a princely sum of $371.60, I had _never_ imagined that I would be able to reach this milestone so soon.

Three major factors contributed to this:

- I optimised the early part of my career for money. After three job changes in 9 years, I now earn more than 9x my first salary.
- I never took on unnecessary debt. I've paid off my credit card bill in full, _every month_. 
- I never lived in rented accommodation, never maintained a car (except for a ~1-year period in 2016), and never splurged on anything except a smattering of gadgets.

All in all, I have primarily lived a frugal life.

Most of this stems from the fact that we were "urban poor" while I was growing up. We never lacked food, nor a house or an education, but the rest of the things were a _little_ out of reach. This meant no holidays, no eating-outs, no expensive toys, and very little social life.

Don't get me wrong. I don't despise my childhood... I had _fun!_ Despite the economic hardship, my parents bought me a PC in 2001. I developed a _serious_ interest in computer programming soon after and eventually became what I am today. It turns out that writing your first line of code at 11 does a lot of good to your career prospects two decades later.

But the fact remains that we had to live sensibly in the first 20 years of my life.

The years went by, and by 2013 I had earned my first paycheck. I was very excited and wanted to spend it all! $371.60 was a lot of money back then. But a small voice inside me stopped me.

Imagine telling a 23-year-old that he should save rather than spend his money... but that's what I did[^2]. I opened a Bank FD and deposited close to $200 in it &ndash; more than half of what I had earned. I have consistently saved >50% of my monthly take-home since[^3].

I used to be very happy when I used to see that number rise in my bank account. Slowly and steadily, I started investing money in the stock market. I've seen a lot of ups and downs there in all these years, and I have (finally) learned not to panic during the _down_ phase. I believe that if I keep up with the discipline of investing, I will eventually end up with many multiples of what I currently have.

You know what, though... lately, these _increased_ numbers have been _increasingly_ failing to impress me.

I have developed a _system_ that is going to make me rich beyond my imagination. But at what cost?

I still don't have a car. I _can_ buy one, of course, but I refuse to do it. Not because it is a depreciating asset, not because I want to keep my carbon footprint to a bare minimum (it's a part of it)... but because I have convinced myself that I don't need it. _I live in Delhi, where I've got the Metro, and I can always hail an Uber whenever I need it._

I have trouble keeping the AC on, even on a hot summer day. I am fidgety about getting a hefty electricity bill. That is when my AC is rated BEE 5 Stars and uses the Inverter technology. I get it serviced every year without fail. I clean its filters regularly. It is perhaps the most efficient AC you'll come across within a 5 km radius of my house. Still, I have trouble keeping it on because I'm scared about a damn electricity bill. We _had_ a reason to be scared about a damn electricity bill 20 years ago. Today, not so much. Yet here we are.

So that $100k in my account? It feels useless. It's just _sitting_ there, adding to itself every day. The more it will be, the more it will become. And I will keep feeding it 75% of my take-home every month. Cute, no?

You must think that I'm such a _privileged little prat_... complaining about an _excess of money_. But it's not about that. This is about balancing _enjoying life_ and _saving for a rainy day_. Right now, I'm doing the latter, with little regard for the former.

A recent Wharton [article](https://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/how-price-shocks-in-formative-years-scar-consumption-for-life/) talked about a phenomenon where adult behaviours were being influenced by price shocks that occurred in the subjects' childhood. I believe we can make a similar argument for a childhood of not having enough money influencing adult behaviours. It scars you for life and makes it very difficult to get out of those learned behaviours.

So... yeah. This is going to be an uphill journey for me. I'm gonna have to make some conscious choices in favour of _living_. I'm gonna have to learn to take some _risks_. And I'm gonna have to stop feeling guilty about spending money, especially on _myself_.

One day...

[^1]: I am paid INR, but in this post, I have converted all monetary values into USD with an exchange rate prevalent on June 16, 2022: 1 USD = 78 INR.
[^2]: Before you start to sympathise with me too much, I _did_ buy a pair of [Sennheiser HD 180](https://www.amazon.in/Sennheiser-180-Over-Ear-Headphones-Black/dp/B00CMQFBG8) that month.
[^3]: Lately, it is around 75%.